32/RLN-SPEC (#482)
vacp2p/rfc: content/docs/rfcs/32/README.md

---
slug: 32
title: 32/RLN-SPEC
name: RLN specification
status: raw
editor: Blagoj Dimovski <blagoj.dimovski@yandex.com>
contributors:
---

# Abstract

The following document covers the specification of the RLN construct as well as the auxiliary libraries necessary for interaction with it.

# Motivation

> RLN (Rate limiting nullfier) is a construct based on zero-knowledge proofs that enables spam prevention mechanism for decentralized, anonymous environments. In anonymous environments, the identity of the entities is unknown, and thus it is very hard to prevent spam attacks. Many applications would benefit from anonimity, but potential for spam could worsen their UX by large extent. RLN allows for anonymous signaling, while enabling spam prevention on protocol level.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
RLN (Rate limiting nullfier) is a construct based on zero-knowledge proofs that enables spam prevention mechanism for decentralized, anonymous environments. In anonymous environments, the identity of the entities is unknown, and thus it is very hard to prevent spam attacks. Many applications would benefit from anonymity, but the potential for spam could worsen their UX to a large extent. RLN allows for anonymous signaling while enabling spam prevention on protocol level.
```

> RLN (Rate limiting nullfier) is a construct based on zero-knowledge proofs that enables spam prevention mechanism for decentralized, anonymous environments. In anonymous environments, the identity of the entities is unknown, and thus it is very hard to prevent spam attacks. Many applications would benefit from anonimity, but potential for spam could worsen their UX by large extent. RLN allows for anonymous signaling, while enabling spam prevention on protocol level.

Reviewer: I suggest adding the definition of spam.

Reviewer: Also, I think it would be good to introduce RLN as a  rate-limiting tool and mention spam protection as one of its applications e.g., it can also be used in e-voting.

Author: I agree, I would add those definitions and change the section accordingly.

---
slug: 32

> title: 32/RLN-SPEC

Reviewer 2: I'd just call this "RLN", "SPEC" seems redundant.

Author: Agreed

name: RLN specification
status: raw
editor: Blagoj Dimovski <blagoj.dimovski@yandex.com>
contributors: <TO BE ADDED>
---

# Abstract

The following document covers the specification of the RLN construct as well as the auxiliary libraries necessary for interaction with it.

# Motivation

> Spamming is the use of messaging systems to send multiple unsolicited messages (spam) to large numbers of recipients for the purpose of commercial advertising, for the purpose of non-commercial proselytizing, for any prohibited purpose (especially the fraudulent purpose of phishing), or simply sending the same message over and over to the same user. 

Reviewer 2: Agree to focus more on rate limiting, and then mention private economic spam protection as an example application, along with others

Author: Do you think anything more should be added here or is this section good?

Spamming by certain entities can worsen the user experience for the other entities in the application, 
and in some cases can be detrimental for the applications.

RLN (Rate limiting nullfier) is a construct based on zero-knowledge proofs that enables spam prevention mechanism for decentralized, anonymous environments. 
In anonymous environments, the identity of the entities is unknown, and thus it is very hard to prevent spam attacks. 
Many applications would benefit from anonymity, but the potential for spam could worsen their UX to a large extent. 
RLN allows for anonymous signaling while enabling spam prevention on protocol level.

# Technical overview

The main RLN construct is implemented using a [ZK-SNARK](https://z.cash/technology/zksnarks/) circuit. 
However it is helpful to describe the other necessary outside components for interaction with the circuit, 
which together with the ZK-SNARK circuit enable the above mentioned features.

## ZK Circuits specification

> Anonymous signaling with spam detection is enabled by proving that the user is part of a group which has high bariers for entry (form of stake) and 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Anonymous signaling with spam detection is enabled by proving that the user is part of a group which has high barriers to entry (form of stake) and 
```

enabling secret reveal if more signals are produced than the spam threshold (system parameter) per epoch.
The membership part is implemented using membership [merkle trees](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Merkle_tree) and merkle proofs, 
while the secret reveal part is enabled by using the Shamir's Secret Sharing scheme. 

> Esentially the protocol requires the users to generate zero-knowledge proof to be able to send signals and participate in the application. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Essentially the protocol requires the users to generate zero-knowledge proof to be able to send signals and participate in the application. 
```

The zero knowledge proof proves that the user is member of a group, 
but also enforces the user to share part of their secret for each signal in an epoch.

> The epoch is an external nullifier which is usually represented by timestamp or a time interval. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The epoch is an external nullifier which is usually represented by timestamp or a time interval. 
```

Might be a good idea to define terms like *external nullifier*, *epoch* etc in a separate section for clarity. E.g. see https://rfc.vac.dev/spec/2/#definitions or https://rfc.vac.dev/spec/13/#terminology

Author: yes I agree with this

> It can also be tought as voting booth in voting applications.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It can also be thought of as a voting booth in voting applications.
```

The ZK Circuit is implemented using a [Groth-16 ZK-SNARK](https://eprint.iacr.org/2016/260.pdf), 
using the [circomlib](https://docs.circom.io/) library.

### System parameters

- `n_levels` - merkle tree depth

### Circuit parameters

**Public Inputs**

> - `x` - signal hash

Reviewer 2: define signal hash

Author: yes good point, will be defined.

- `epoch` - epoch
- `rln_identifier` - random finite field value, unique per RLN app (see below for more description)

**Private Inputs**
* `identity_secret_hash` - the identity secret hash of the user
* `path_elements` - merkle tree membership proof component
* `identity_path_index` - merkle tree membership proof component

**Outputs**
- `y` - the output of the secret equation
- `root` - the membership tree root
- `nullifier` - the internal nullifier

### Hash function

> Canonical [Poseidon hash implementation](https://eprint.iacr.org/2019/458.pdf) is used, 

Reviewer 2: Perhaps we can write here what the canonical parameters used are?

Also, it'd be neat if we could have some basic section for security considerations / cryptographic primitives. E.g. see

https://rfc.vac.dev/spec/26/#cryptographic-primitives https://rfc.vac.dev/spec/10/#primary-adversarial-model https://rfc.vac.dev/spec/13/#security-consideration

There we can write main assumptions, e.g:
- Poseidon primitive used and what happens if it is broken
- Groth16 used and what happens if trusted setup is broken (e.g.), see https://github.com/vacp2p/research/issues/9

Author: Agreed, I will add this section and also mention which params are used for the canonical poseidon.

> as implemented in the circomlib library, according to the Poseidon paper.

Reviewer 2: - Link to implementation in circomlib
- Mention that circomlib poseidon is an example / (e.g. https://github.com/kilic/rln/blob/master/src/poseidon.rs should work too)

More generally, we can clarify this in implementation section that the concepts can be implemented separately (e.g. https://github.com/kilic/rln/), but for interop reasons circom-based on is canonical one.

Author: Yes I will add this, basically the broader conclusion would be that different posseidon hash functions can be used, and we're using the canonical one for interop reasons as described.

### Membership implementation

> For a valid signal, user's `identity commitment` (more on identity commitments below) must be exists in identity membership tree.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For a valid signal, a user's `identity commitment` must exist in the identity membership tree. More on identity commitments below.
```

## Identity credentials generation

In order to be able to generate valid proofs, the users need to be part of the identity membership merkle tree. 
They are part of the identity membership merkle tree if their `identity_commitment` is placed in a leaf in the tree.

The identity credentials of a user are composed of:

- `identity_secret`
- `identity_secret_hash`
- `identity_commitment`

### `identity_secret`

The `identity_secret` is generated in the following way:

```
    identity_nullifier = random_32_byte_buffer
    identity_trapdoor = random_32_byte_buffer
    identity_secret = [identity_nullifier, identity_trapdoor]
```

The same secret should not be used accross different protocols, 
because revealing the secret at one protocol could break privacy for the user in the other protocols.  

### `identity_secret_hash`

The `identity_secret_hash` is generated by obtaining a Poseidon hash of the `identity_secret` array:

```
    identity_secret_hash = poseidonHash(identity_secret)
```

### `identity_commitment`

The `identity_commitment` is generated by obtaining a Poseidon hash of the `identity_secret_hash`: 

```
identity_commitment = poseidonHash([identity_secret_hash])
```

> # Flow

Reviewer 2: Perhaps we can make a short list of steps to make the flow more clear? After basic introduction perhaps.

E.g.

1. Registration
2. ...

We can also do a sequence diagram https://rfc.vac.dev/spec/10/#overview-of-protocol-interaction but might be overkill for now, up to you

Author: I agree, sequence diagram will be helpful for sure.

After they are part of the memebrship group, 
the users can generate ZK-Proofs for their signals and can participate in the application. 
If a user generates more signals than allowed in an epoch, 
the user risks being slashed - by revealing his secret and revealing his identity commitment. 
If financial stake is put in place, the user also risks his stake being taken.

## Registration

Depending on the application requirements, the registration can be implemented in different ways, for example: 
- centralized registrations, by using a central server
- decentralized registrations, by using a smart contract

What is important is that the user's identity commitment is stored in a merkle tree, 
and the users can obtain a merkle proof proving that they are part of the group.

Also depending on the application requirements, 
usually a financial or social stake is introduced.

An example for financial stake is: For each registration a certain amount of ETH is required.
An example for social stake is using InterRep as a registry - 
users need to prove that they have a highly reputable social media account.

The user's identity is composed of:

```
{

>     identity_secret: secret_component_arr,

Reviewer 2: What is `secret_component_arr`? New term that should be introduced

Author: Yes I will fix this, this is left over from the previous writeup.

    identity_secret_hash: poseidonHash(identity_secret),
    identity_commitment: poseidonHash([identity_secret_hash])
}
```

> For registration, the user needs to submit their `identity_commitment` (along with any additional registration requirements) to the registry party. 

Reviewer 2: Do we want to call it "registry party" more officially? Would be good if this was consistent/more formally defined. E.g. if it is a single source of truth (merkle tree on chain / server).

This makes it easier to reason about when there different views of the same canonical data (e.g. in p2p setting where the merkle tree might be out of date, or a mismatch could be introduced in race condition or whatever)

Author: No I couldn't find a better term for this, feel free to suggest what would be a better term for this. Maybe just `registry` is enough, but open for suggestions.

Reviewer 2: `registry` seems fine to me :)

Upon registration, they should receive `leaf_index` value which represents their position in the merkle tree. 
Receiving a `leaf_index` is not a hard requirement and is application specific. 
The other way around is the users calculating the `leaf_index` themselves upon successful registration.

## Signaling

After registration, 
the users can participate in the application by sending signals to the other participants in a decentralised manner or to a centralised server. 
Along with their signal, 
they need to generate a ZK-Proof by using the circuit with the specification described above. 

For generating a proof, 
the users need to obtain the required parameters or compute them themselves, 
depending on the application implementation and client libraries supported by the application.

> For example the users can store the memebrship merkle tree on their end and 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For example the users can store the membership merkle tree on their end and 
```

generate a merkle proof whenever they want to generate a signal. 

### Signal hash

The signal hash is generated by hashing the raw signal (or content) using the `keccak256` hash function, 

> converting the hashed value to number and padding it:

Reviewer 2: What is number?

One thing to be careful of here is making assumptions on how things work in JS. I don't see anything immediately that'd be inconsistent, but it might come up later. Can deal with in follow up issues as it becomes relevant :)

Author: Yes this might be too technical, and we should make it more general/abstract.

```
  signal: string = "signal"
  converted: string = toHex(toUtf8Bytes(signal))
  signal_hash: bigint = BigInt(keccak256(converted)) >> BigInt(8)
```

### Epoch

> The epoch (or external nullifier) is also obtained by hasing a raw string value using `keccak256`:

Reviewer 2: Rewrite for clarity - if I understand correctly this could be a new section, something like:

### External nullifier

The external nullifier is hashed using `keccak256` in the same way as for `epoch` above.

> The epoch (or external nullifier) is also obtained by hasing a raw string value using `keccak256`:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The epoch (or external nullifier) is also obtained by hashing a raw string value using `keccak256`:
```

```

>     raw_epoch: string = "1234"

Reviewer 2: There are quite a lot of fields and stuff going on, so I like using concrete examples. It'd be useful to have it for more messages, e.g. concrete values for epoch, limit etc.

Perhaps we can have an "example" section? E.g. like https://rfc.vac.dev/spec/16/#example-usage Either appended to each subsection, or as an "Example usage" section at top level

Author: Example usage section would be great. I will add it.

    converted: string = keccak256(raw_epoch)
    hex_string: string = converted.slice(8, 64)
    epoch: string = "0x" + hex_string.padStart(64, "0")
```

### Merkle proof

The merkle proof should be obtained locally or from a trusted third party. 

> By using the incremental merkle tree algorithm, 

Reviewer 2: Reference to this algorithm (can be to code or paper or blog post or whatever seems most canonical/useful)

Author: I will do, I think I have it in references but will link it explicitly here.

the merkle can be obtained by providing the `leaf_index` of the `identity_commitment`. 
The proof (`merkle_proof`) is composed of the following fields:

```
{
  root: bigint
  indices: number[]
  path_elements: bigint[][]
}
```

### Generating proof

For proof generation, 
the user need to submit the following fields to the circuit:

```
    {
      identity_secret: identity_secret_hash,
      path_elements: merkle_proof.path_elements,
      identity_path_index: merkle_proof.indices,
      x: signal_hash,
      epoch: epoch,
      rln_identifier: rlnIdentifier
    }
```

> The generated proof (`zk_proof`) is composed of the following fields:

Reviewer 2: Elaborate on what these fields stand for (or link to reference that explains)

Author: Will do

```
{
  pi_a: Array<string>,
  pi_b: [ [Array<string>], [Array<string>], [Array<string>] ],
  pi_c: Array<string>
  protocol: string,

>   curve: string

Reviewer 2: Are we making assumptions on curve? If so we should add this to primitives where Poseidon constants etc are defined

Author: No assumptions, maybe this part should be removed as it is too detailed and probably does not add anything significant to the specification?

Reviewer 2: I think it is fine to mention, but we can refer to more canonical place that deals with this type of thing. Where is this output from exactly and what does e.g. a, b, c correspond to here? Is this a general way of representing a proof?

If it is, and we know what is expected for each field, It means we can more easily compare different implementations, e.g. Rust based on etc to make sure proofs are identical.

}
```

### Calculating output

The proof output is calculated locally, 
in order for the required fields for proof verification to be sent along with the proof. 
The proof output is composed of the `y` share of the secret equation and the `nullifier`. 
The following fields are needed for proof output calculation:

```
{
  identity_secret: bigint, 
  epoch: bigint, 
  x: bigint, 
  limit: number, 
  rln_identifier: bigint
}
```

The output `[y, nullifier]` is calculated in the following way:

```
a_0 = identity_secret
a_1 = poseidonHash([a0, epoch])

y = a_0 + x * a_1

nullifier = poseidonHash([a_1, rln_identifier])
```

> ### Sending proof

Reviewer 2: This head makes it seem like it is just sending proof, but it is sending "output message", which includes proof

Author: Yes, will be changed.

    signal_hash,
    epoch,
    rln_identifier
]
```

If the proof verification is correct, 
the verification continues, otherwise the message is discarded.

**4. spam verification**

After the proof is verified The `x`, and `y` fields are added to the `x_shares` and `y_shares` arrays of the `messaging_metadata` `epoch` and `nullifier` object. 
If the length of the arrays is equal to the spam threshold (`limit`), the user can be slashed.

### Slashing

After the verification, the user can be slashed if enough shares are present to reconstruct their `identity_secret_hash` from `x_shares` and `y_shares` fields, 
for their `nullifier` in an `epoch`.
The secret can be retreived by the properties of the Shamir's secret sharing scheme. 
In particular the secret (`a_0`) can be retrieved by computing `Lagrange polynomials`. 

After the secret is retreived,
 the user's `identity_commitment` can be generated from the secret and it can be used for removing the user from the membership merkle tree (zeroing out the leaf that contains the user's `identity_commitment`). 
Additionally, depending on the application the `identity_secret_hash` can be used for taking the user's provided stake.

> # Auxiliary tooling

Reviewer 2: What about making this a subsection under something like "implementation notes"? E.g. see https://rfc.vac.dev/spec/10/#appendix-c-implementation-notes

Then we can mention:

- Circom-based RLN is recommended because of small differences and having interop - also link to this Circuit implementation
- However existing ones like https://github.com/kilic/rln work
- Any other notes that are useful for people who would be *implementing* or analyzing RLN, or *using* it

Author: Seems like a great idea

There are few additional tools implemented for easier integrations and usage of the RLN protocol.

[`zk-kit`](https://github.com/appliedzkp/zk-kit) is a typescript library which exposes APIs for identity credentials generation, 
as well as proof generation. 
It supports various protocols (`Semaphore`, `RLN`),.

[`zk-keeper`](https://github.com/akinovak/zk-keeper) is a browser plugin which allows for safe credential storing and proof generation. 
You can think of MetaMask for ZK-Proofs. 
It uses `zk-kit` under the hood.

> 

Reviewer 2: Don't forget the Copyright section :) Like this https://rfc.vac.dev/spec/10/#copyright

Author: Will be added

The proof (`merkle_proof`) is composed of the following fields:

```
{
  root: bigint
  indices: number[]
  path_elements: bigint[][]
}
```

#### Generating proof

For proof generation, 
the user need to submit the following fields to the circuit:

```
    {
      identity_secret: identity_secret_hash,
      path_elements: merkle_proof.path_elements,
      identity_path_index: merkle_proof.indices,
      x: signal_hash,
      external_nullifier: external_nullifier,
      rln_identifier: rln_identifier
    }
```

#### Calculating output

The proof output is calculated locally, 
in order for the required fields for proof verification to be sent along with the proof. 
The proof output is composed of the `y` share of the secret equation and the `internal_nullifier`. 
The `internal_nullifier` represents an unique fingerprint for the user for the `external_nullifier`.
The following fields are needed for proof output calculation:

```
{
  identity_secret_hash: bigint, 
  external_nullifier: bigint, 
  rln_identifier: bigint,
  x: bigint, 
}
```

The output `[y, internal_nullifier]` is calculated in the following way:

```
a_0 = identity_secret

> a_1 = poseidonHash([a0, external_nullifier])

Reviewer: I thought the idea of having an rln identifier was to make the secret-sharing application-specific so that users can use the same rln group for different applications, however, in this formulation, rln identifier is not used at all. It is only used in the internal nullifier. Shouldn't the rln identifier be embedded in the `a1` coefficient?

Author: The role of RLN identifier is to obfuscate the nullifer so that a user generating a signal for two different apps at the same epoch is impossible to identify (impossible without additional extra metadata, the additional metadata being the user's secret).  For this reason the RLN identifier is used in the internal nullifier as a strong enough measure to prevent this issues. There are potentially other solutions for this, I am not 100% sure if this can be embedded in the a1 coefficient without having significant impact on the other parts of the architecture.

Reviewer: > that a user generating a signal for two different apps at the same epoch is impossible to identify

One way is to do a brute-force on the published secret shares (of all the peers) for each epoch to recover various secret keys and see if their commitment appears in the membership group.

Author: Agreed, the brute force attacks possibilities are open, especially if:
- the same epoch scheme is used across different applications
- an epoch is chosen inappropriately ("larger" epoch increases the probability of messages being sent to different application in the same epoch) 
- the anonymity sets are small

We'll look further on how to resolve this problem, and also reconsider the possibility of brute force attacks.

#### Sending the output message

The user's output message (`output_message`), 
containing the signal should contain the following fields at minimum:

```
{
    signal: signal, # non-hashed signal
    proof: zk_proof,
    internal_nullifier: internal_nullifier,
    x: x, # signal_hash
    y: y,
    rln_identifier: rln_identifier
}
```

Additionally depending on the application, 
the following fields might be required:

```
  {
      root: merkle_proof.root,
      external_nullifier: external_nullifier
  }
```

## Verification and slashing

The slashing implementation is dependent on the type of application. 
If the application is implemented in a centralised manner, 
and everything is stored on a single server, 
the slashing will be implemented only on the server. 
Otherwise if the application is distributed, 
the slashing will be implemented on each user's client.

### Implementation notes

Each user of the protocol (server or otherwise) will need to store metadata for each message received by each user, 
for the given external_nullifier. 
The data can be deleted when the external_nullifier passes. 

> Storing metadata is required, so that if a user sends more than one unique signal per external_nullifier, 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
for the given `external_nullifier`. 
The data can be deleted when the `external_nullifier` passes. 
Storing metadata is required, so that if a user sends more than one unique signal per `external_nullifier`, 
```

they can be slashed and removed from the protocol. 
The metadata stored contains the `x`, `y` shares and the `internal_nullifier` for the user for each message. 
If enough such shares are present, the user's secret can be retreived.

> One way of storing received metadata (`messaging_metadata`) is the following format: 

Reviewer: Is it a JSON format?

Author: Yes it is pseudo json format, where `[external_nullifier]` and `[internal_nullifier]` represent that values for the respective external_nullifier and internal_nullifier should be provided.

```
{
    [external_nullifier]: {
        [internal_nullifier]: {
            x_shares: [],
            y_shares: []
        }
    }
}
```

#### Verification

The output message verification consists of the following steps:
- `external_nullifier` correctness
- non-duplicate message check
- `zk_proof` verification
- spam verification

**1. `external_nullifier` correctness**
Upon received `output_message`, first the `external_nullifierexternal_nullifier` field is checked, 
to ensure that the message matches the current external_nullifier. 

> If the external_nullifier is correct the verification continues, otherwise the message is discarded.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Upon received `output_message`, first the `external_nullifier` field is checked, 
to ensure that the message matches the current `external_nullifier`. 
If the `external_nullifier` is correct the verification continues, otherwise, the message is discarded.
```

**2. non-duplicate message check**
The received message is checked to ensure it is not duplicate. 
The duplicate message check is performed by verifying that the `x` and `y` fields do not exist in the `messaging_metadata` object. 
If the `x` and `y` fields exist in the `x_shares` and `y_shares` array for the `external_nullifier` and the `internal_nullifier` the message can be considered as a duplicate. 
Duplicate messages are discarded.

**3. `zk_proof` verification**

The `zk_proof` should be verified by providing the `zk_proof` field to the circuit verifier along with the `public_signal`:

```
[
    y,
    merkle_proof.root,
    internal_nullifier,
    signal_hash,
    external_nullifier,
    rln_identifier
]
```

If the proof verification is correct, 
the verification continues, otherwise the message is discarded.

> **4. spam verification**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**4. Double signaling verification**
```

> After the proof is verified The `x`, and `y` fields are added to the `x_shares` and `y_shares` arrays of the `messaging_metadata` `external_nullifier` and `internal_nullifier` object. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After the proof is verified the `x`, and `y` fields are added to the `x_shares` and `y_shares` arrays of the `messaging_metadata` `external_nullifier` and `internal_nullifier` object. 
```

> If the length of the arrays is equal to the spam threshold (`limit`), the user can be slashed.

Reviewer: Isn't fixed to 2?

```suggestion
If the length of the arrays is equal to the signaling threshold (`limit`), the user can be slashed.
```

#### Slashing

> After the verification, the user can be slashed if enough shares are present to reconstruct their `identity_secret_hash` from `x_shares` and `y_shares` fields, 

Reviewer: `identity_secret_hash`  or `identity_secret`?

 ```suggestion
After the verification, the user can be slashed if enough shares are present to reconstruct their `identity_secret` from `x_shares` and `y_shares` fields, 
```

Author: Identity secret hash, identity secret is an array of two elements: [identity_nullifier, identity_trapdoor]

for their `internal_nullifier`.
The secret can be retreived by the properties of the Shamir's secret sharing scheme. 

> In particular the secret (`a_0`) can be retrieved by computing `Lagrange polynomials`. 

Reviewer: A ref to the Lagrange interpolation would be good

Author: Yes, will add that.

 the user's `identity_commitment` can be generated from the secret and it can be used for removing the user from the membership merkle tree (zeroing out the leaf that contains the user's `identity_commitment`). 
Additionally, depending on the application the `identity_secret_hash` can be used for taking the user's provided stake.

# Technical overview

The main RLN construct is implemented using a [ZK-SNARK](https://z.cash/technology/zksnarks/) circuit. 
However it is helpful to describe the other necessary outside components for interaction with the circuit, 
which together with the ZK-SNARK circuit enable the above mentioned features.

## Terminology

| Term                      | Description                                                                         |
|---------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| **ZK-SNARK**    | https://z.cash/technology/zksnarks/              |
| **Stake**                 | Financial or social stake required for registering in the RLN applications.  Common stake examples are: locking cryptocurrency (financial), linking reputable social identity. |

> | **Identity secret**       | An array of two unique random components (identity nullifier and identity trapdoor), which must be kept private by the user. Secret hash and identity commitment are derived from this array.        |

Reviewer: The mathematical relation between identity trapdoor and identity secret is not explained in the specs, maybe just add a todo to include its description later

Author: Yes, but that is out of the scope for this document. The nullifier and trapdoor namings are used here to preserve consistency with other protocols (where these fields are actually used more). Here we only use them as a basis to derive a hash from them.

| **Identity nullifier**    | Random 32 byte value used as component for identity secret generation.              |
| **Identity trapdoor**     | Random 32 byte value used as component for identity secret generation.              |
| **Identity secret hash**  | The hash of the identity secret, obtained using the Poseidon hash function. It is used for deriving the identity commitment of the user, and as a private input for zk proof generation. The secret hash should be kept private by the user.                            |

> | **Identity commitment**   | Hash obtained from the `Identity secret hash` by using the poseidon hash function. It is used by the users for registering in the protocol.                                       |

Reviewer: Why two layers of hashing are needed? `id comm = h(h(secret id key))` why not `id comm = h(secret id key)`?

Author: This is a great question. The hashing scheme used here is based on the design decisions which also include the Semaphore circuits. Our goal was to ensure compatibility of the secrets for apps that use Semaphore and RLN circuits while also not compromising on security because of using the same secrets.

For example let's say there is a voting app that uses Semaphore, and also a chat app that uses RLN. The UX would be better if the users would not need to care about complicated identity management (secrets and commitments) they use for each app, and it would be much better if they could use a single id commitment for this. Also in some cases these kind of dependency is required - RLN chat app using Interep as a registry (instead of using financial stake). 
One potential concern about this interoperability is a slashed user on the RLN app side having their security compromised on the semaphore side apps as well. I.e obtaining the user's secret, anyone would be able to generate valid semaphore proofs as the slashed user. We don't want that, and we should keep user's app specific security threats in the domain of that app alone.

To achieve the above interoperability UX while preventing the shared app security model (i.e slashing user on an RLN app having impact on Semaphore apps), we had to do the follow in regard the identity secret and identity commitment:

Identity secret = [nullifier, trapdoor]
Identity secret hash = poseidon(Identity secret)
Identity commitment = poseidon(Identity secret hash)

Secret components for generating Semaphore proof:
- nullifier
- trapdoor

Secret components for generting RLN proof:
- identity secret hash

When a user is slashed on the RLN app side, their identity secret hash is revealed. However a semaphore proof can't be generated because we do not know the user's nullifier and trapdoor.
With this design we achieve:

id commitment (Semaphore) == id commitment (RLN)
secret (semaphore) != secret (RLN).

This is the only option we had for the scheme in order to satisfy the properties described above.

Also for RLN we do a single secret component input for the circuit. Thus we need to hash the secret array (two components) to a secret hash, and we use that as a secret component input.

Reviewer: Thanks for the very clear explanation.  This is an important design choice and is worth being included at the end of the spec in a separate section like `#Security consideration`  or `#compatibility with Semaphore`.

Author: Added in a new appendix:
Appendix B: Identity scheme choice

> | **Identity commitment**   | Hash obtained from the `Identity secret hash` by using the poseidon hash function. It is used by the users for registering in the protocol.                                       |

Reviewer: All the hashed in these two lines refer to Poseidon hash?

Author: Identity secret hash and Identity commitment are obtained using the Poseidon hash function.

| **Signal**                | The message generated by a user. It is an arbitrary bit string that may represent a chat message, a URL request, protobuf message, etc. |

> | **Signal hash**           | Hash of the signal, used as an input in the RLN circuit. |

Reviewer: Poseidon hash (not Keccak)?

Author: Signal hash is keccak hash, will update this.

| **RLN Identifier**        | Random finite field value unique per RLN app. It is used for additional cross-application security. The role of the RLN identifier is protection of the user secrets being compromised if signals are being generated with the same credentials at different apps. |
| **RLN membership tree**   | Merkle tree data structure, filled with identity commitments of the users. Serves as a data structure that ensures user registrations.   |
| **Merkle proof**          | Proof that a user is member of the RLN membership tree.    |

## RLN ZK-Circuit specific terms

| Term           | Description                                                       |
|---------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

> | **x**               | Hash of the signal.    |

Reviewer: Poseidon hash?

Author: No, Keccak hash

The zero knowledge proof proves that the user is member of a group, 
but also enforces the user to share part of their secret for each signal in an external nullifier.
The external nullifier is usually represented by timestamp or a time interval. 
It can also be thought of as a voting booth in voting applications.

The ZK Circuit is implemented using a [Groth-16 ZK-SNARK](https://eprint.iacr.org/2016/260.pdf), 
using the [circomlib](https://docs.circom.io/) library.

### System parameters

- `n_levels` - merkle tree depth

### Circuit parameters

**Public Inputs**
- `x` 
- `external_nullifier`
- `rln_identifier`

**Private Inputs**
* `identity_secret_hash`
* `path_elements` - rln membership proof component
* `identity_path_index` - rln membership proof component

**Outputs**
- `y`
- `root` - the rln membership tree root
- `internal_nullifier`

### Hash function

Canonical [Poseidon hash implementation](https://eprint.iacr.org/2019/458.pdf) is used, 
as implemented in the [circomlib library](https://github.com/iden3/circomlib/blob/master/circuits/poseidon.circom), according to the Poseidon paper.

> This Poseidon hash version (canonical implementation) is uses the following parameters:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This Poseidon hash version (canonical implementation) uses the following parameters:
```

`path_elements` and `identity_path_index`.

[IncrementalQuinTree](https://github.com/appliedzkp/incrementalquintree) algorithm is used for constructing the Membership merkle tree. 
The circuits are reused from this repository. 
You can find out more details about the IncrementalQuinTree algorithm [here](https://ethresear.ch/t/gas-and-circuit-constraint-benchmarks-of-binary-and-quinary-incremental-merkle-trees-using-the-poseidon-hash-function/7446).

### Slashing and Shamir's Secret Sharing

Slashing is enabled by using polynomials and [Shamir's Secret sharing](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shamir%27s_Secret_Sharing). 
In order to produce a valid proof, `identity_secret_hash` as a private input to the circuit. 
Then a secret equation is created in the form of:

```
y = a_0 + x*a_1,
```

where `a_0` is the `identity_secret_hash` and `a_1 = hash(a_0, external nullifier)`.
Along with the generated proof, 
the users need to provide a (x, y) share which satisfies the line equation, 
in order for their proof to be verified. 
`x` is the hashed signal, while the `y` is the circuit output. 
With more than one pair of unique shares, anyone can derive `a_0`, the `identity_secret_hash` . 

> Hash of a signal will be evaluation point x. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The hash of a signal will be evaluation point `x`. 
```

> So that a member who sends more that one unique signal per external_nullifier risks their identity secret being revealed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So that a member who sends more than one unique signal per `external_nullifier` risks their identity secret being revealed.
```

> Note that shares used for different external nullifiers and different RLN apps cannot be used to derive the secret key.

Reviewer: Related to this, please see my comment on line 156.

Author: Yes, addressed the nullifier question there. I will update the text to be more clear regarding the nullifier.

The `rln_identifier` is a random value from a finite field, 
unique per RLN app, 
and is used for additional cross-application security - to protect the user secrets being compromised if they use the same credentials accross different RLN apps. 
If `rln_identifier` is not present, 
the user uses the same credentials and sends a different message for two different RLN apps using the same `external_nullifier`,
then their secret key can be revealed. 
With adding the `rln_identifier` field we obscure the nullifier, 

> so this kind of attack cannot happen. 

Reviewer: Obscuring the internal nullifier does not alone make the attack impossible, an attacker with some side knowledge can still target a particular peer knowing that she uses the same rln credentials for two different apps.

Author: This is true, but that side knowledge would be the internal nullifier itself. Otherwise it is very hard to keep track of whose messages are the targeted user's one. Think of the internal nullifier as a user's epoch based identity. If that is different per app, you can't really find out which messages are which. However if there is an entity that can link messages to the specific user (i.e they identify the user by a certain identifiable property), then this would be problematic but then we have larger problems than the nullifier itself.

- `identity_secret`
- `identity_secret_hash`
- `identity_commitment`

### `identity_secret`

The `identity_secret` is generated in the following way:

```
    identity_nullifier = random_32_byte_buffer
    identity_trapdoor = random_32_byte_buffer
    identity_secret = [identity_nullifier, identity_trapdoor]
```

The same secret should not be used accross different protocols, 
because revealing the secret at one protocol could break privacy for the user in the other protocols.  

### `identity_secret_hash`

The `identity_secret_hash` is generated by obtaining a Poseidon hash of the `identity_secret` array:

```
    identity_secret_hash = poseidonHash(identity_secret)
```

### `identity_commitment`

The `identity_commitment` is generated by obtaining a Poseidon hash of the `identity_secret_hash`: 

```
identity_commitment = poseidonHash([identity_secret_hash])
```

# Appendix A: Security considerations

RLN is an experimental and still un-audited technology. This means that the circuits have not been yet audited. 
Another consideration is the security of the underlying primitives. 
zk-SNARKS require a trusted setup for generating a prover and verifier keys.

> The standard for this is to use trusted [Multi-Party Computation (MPC)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Secure_multi-party_computation) ceremony, 

Reviewer: I'd suggest linking the original MPC for groth16 (in replace of the Wikipedia link)

Author: MPC for the RLN circuits has not yet been done, would be happy to replace the wikipedia links if you think there is something more appropriate that describes the concept.

which requires two phases. 

> Trusted MPC ceremony has not yet been performed for the RLN circuits.

Reviewer: I think it is done, I will find a link and share it with you.

Author: MPC for the RLN circuits has not yet been done.

Reviewer: Right, the one I knew about was for Semaphore

---
slug: 32
title: 32/RLN
name: Rate Limit Nullifier
status: raw
editor: Blagoj Dimovski <blagoj.dimovski@yandex.com>

> contributors: 

Reviewer: I'd like to suggest the following contributors
Barry (don't know his contact), Sanaz Taheri <sanaz@status.im>, and Oskar Thorén <oskar@status.im>

Author: Added, will ask Barry for contact info and will add that.

Author: Barry's contact info updated

---
slug: 32
title: 32/RLN

> name: Rate Limit Nullifier specification

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
name: Rate Limit Nullifier
```

status: raw
editor: Blagoj Dimovski <blagoj.dimovski@yandex.com>
contributors: 
---

# Abstract

> The following document covers the specification of the RLN construct as well as the auxiliary libraries necessary for interaction with it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following specification covers the RLN construct as well as some auxiliary libraries useful for interacting with it.
```

Reviewer 2: > Rate limiting nullified (RLN) is a construct based on zero-knowledge proofs that provides an anonymous rate-limited signaling/messaging framework suitable for decentralized (and centralized) environments. 

I wonder if this doesn't belong in abstract aka "what is this", then motivation section is more "why do we need this"

# Motivation

> Rate limiting nullified (RLN) is a construct based on zero-knowledge proofs that provides an anonymous rate-limited signaling/messaging framework suitable for decentralized (and centralized) environments. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Rate limiting nullifier (RLN) is a construct based on zero-knowledge proofs that provides an anonymous rate-limited signaling/messaging framework suitable for decentralized (and centralized) environments. 
```

Anonymity refers to the unlinkability of messages to their owner.
RLN guarantees a messaging rate is enforced cryptographically while preserving the anonymity of the message owners.
A wide range of applications can benefit from RLN and provide desirable security features. 
For example, an e-voting system can integrate RLN to contain the voting rate while protecting the voters-vote unlinkability. 
Another use case is to protect an anonymous messaging system against DDoS and spam attacks by containing messaging rate of users. 
This latter use case is explained in [17/Waku-RLN-Relay RFC](/spec/17).

# Flow

The users participate in the protocol by first registering to an application-defined group referred by the _membership group_.
Registration to the group is mandatory for signaling in the application. 
After registration, group members can generate Zero-knowledge Proof of membership for their signals and can participate in the application. 
Usually, the membership requires a financial or social stake which 
is beneficial for the prevention of Sybil attacks and double-signaling.

> Group members are allowed to send one signal per epoch.

Reviewer: Since the spec is not gonna be focused on spam protection use case, then I think the `epoch` should be replaced with `external nullifier` throughout the spec.

> Group members are allowed to send one signal per epoch.

Reviewer: Also,  `epoch` (or external nullifier) is not conceptually defined at this point.

If a user generates more signals than allowed in an epoch, 

> the user risks being slashed - by revealing his membership secret credentials. secret and revealing his identity commitment. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the user risks being slashed - by revealing his membership secret credentials. 
```

If the financial stake is put in place, the user also risks his stake being taken.

Generally the flow can be described by the following steps:

1. Registration
2. Signaling
3. Verification and slashing

## Registration

Depending on the application requirements, the registration can be implemented in different ways, for example: 
- centralized registrations, by using a central server
- decentralized registrations, by using a smart contract

> What is important is that the user's identity commitment is stored in a merkle tree, 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
What is important is that the users' identity commitments (explained in section [User Indetity](#user-identity)) are stored in a Merkle tree, 
```

> and the users can obtain a merkle proof proving that they are part of the group.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and the users can obtain a Merkle proof proving that they are part of the group.
```

Also depending on the application requirements, 
usually a financial or social stake is introduced.

An example for financial stake is: For each registration a certain amount of ETH is required.

> An example for social stake is using InterRep as a registry - 

Reviewer: A ref to Unirep would be great.

users need to prove that they have a highly reputable social media account.

### Implementation notes

#### User identity

The user's identity is composed of:

```
{
    identity_secret: [identity_nullifier, identity_trapdoor],
    identity_secret_hash: poseidonHash(identity_secret),
    identity_commitment: poseidonHash([identity_secret_hash])
}
```

For registration, the user needs to submit their `identity_commitment` (along with any additional registration requirements) to the registry. 

> Upon registration, they should receive `leaf_index` value which represents their position in the merkle tree. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Upon registration, they should receive a `leaf_index` value which represents their position in the Merkle tree. 
```

Receiving a `leaf_index` is not a hard requirement and is application specific. 
The other way around is the users calculating the `leaf_index` themselves upon successful registration.

## Signaling

After registration, 
the users can participate in the application by sending signals to the other participants in a decentralised manner or to a centralised server. 
Along with their signal, 

> they need to generate a ZK-Proof by using the circuit with the specification described above. 

Reviewer: there is no circuit specification `above`, you may put a link to the corresponding section.

For generating a proof, 

> the users need to obtain the required parameters or compute them themselves, 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the users need to have access to the recent state of the membership Merkle tree.
They may obtain this information by querying from others or by computing locally, 
```

depending on the application implementation and client libraries supported by the application.

> For example the users can store the membership merkle tree on their end and 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, the users can store the membership Merkle tree on their end and 
```

> generate a merkle proof whenever they want to generate a signal. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
generate a Merkle proof whenever they want to generate a signal. 
```

### Implementation notes

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The information required for proof generation is as follows:
```

#### Signal hash

The signal hash can be generated by hashing the raw signal (or content) using the `keccak256` hash function.

> #### Epoch

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### External Nullifier
```

> The epoch can be generated by hashing a raw string (i.e UNIX timestamp) value using `keccak256`.

Reviewer: This definition is not general (it is specific to the spam protection application).

####  Obtaining merkle proof

The merkle proof should be obtained locally or from a trusted third party. 
By using the [incremental merkle tree algorithm](https://github.com/appliedzkp/incrementalquintree/blob/master/ts/IncrementalQuinTree.ts), 
the merkle can be obtained by providing the `leaf_index` of the `identity_commitment`. 
The proof (`merkle_proof`) is composed of the following fields:

```
{
  root: bigint

>   indices: number[]

Reviewer: Can you please add an explanation for each of these fields?

Reviewer: You may have missed this comment 👉  https://github.com/vacp2p/rfc/pull/482/files#r814354721

  path_elements: bigint[][]
}
```

#### Generating proof

For proof generation, 
the user need to submit the following fields to the circuit:

```
    {

>       identity_secret: identity_secret_hash,

Reviewer: I think there is no need to indicate these fields as key-value pairs, is there any specific reason for this representation?

      path_elements: merkle_proof.path_elements,
      identity_path_index: merkle_proof.indices,
      x: signal_hash,
      epoch: epoch,

>       rln_identifier: rln_identifier

Reviewer: The rln identifier is not introduce yet in the spec

    }
```

#### Calculating output

The proof output is calculated locally, 
in order for the required fields for proof verification to be sent along with the proof. 

> The proof output is composed of the `y` share of the secret equation and the `internal_nullifier`. 

Reviewer: The secret sharing is not yet explained

The following fields are needed for proof output calculation:

```

> {

Reviewer: Isn't this the same as the parameters explained in line 125? We may be able to remove this one if they are duplicates

  identity_secret_hash: bigint, 
  epoch: bigint, 
  rln_identifier: bigint,

>   x: bigint, 

Reviewer: btw, why path elements are excluded?  isn't it needed for proof output calculation?

}
```

> The output `[y, internal_nullifier]` is calculated in the following way:

Reviewer: I'd suggest adding the description of Shamir secret sharing (or just the linear secret sharing) in here and incorporating the a_0 and a_1 equations in that description.

Author: this has been address already

```
a_0 = identity_secret
a_1 = poseidonHash([a0, epoch])

y = a_0 + x * a_1

> internal_nullifier = poseidonHash([a_1, rln_identifier])

Reviewer: would be good to also add a bride description of the role of internal nullified (like a fingerprint for users in the given external nullifier)

```

#### Sending the output message

The user's output message (`output_message`), 
containing the signal should contain the following fields at minimum:

```
{

>     content: signal, # non-hashed signal

Reviewer: wondering why the key-value pair format? 
e.g., `signal` is already a named variable, it is a bit confusing to use the `content` term for it.  Can `content` contain anything rather than `signal`?

Author: You're right, let's just name it signal

    proof: zk_proof,
    internal_nullifier: internal_nullifier,

>     x: x, # signal_hash

Reviewer: I think later in the spec we use the term share_x and share_y for x and y, it is better to use a consistent notation.

Reviewer: @bdim1 I thought you may have missed this comment ☝️

Author: sorry @staheri14 but everywhere now x and y are used. Except the storage container metadata variable namings, but the notation there is explicit enough to account for these differences (x_shares and y_shares). Also the context where these are used is very clear:

```
If the `x` and `y` fields exist in the `x_shares` and `y_shares` array for the `external_nullifier` and the `internal_nullifier` the message can be considered as a duplicate. 
Duplicate messages are discarded.
```

    y: y,
    rln_identifier: rln_identifier
}
```

Additionally depending on the application, 
the following fields might be required:

```
  {
      root: merkle_proof.root,

>       epoch: epoch

Reviewer: Why they are not defaults?  I think it would be prudent to include them in the required fields (as default behavior), but then saying they may be excluded if the application wants so. I think typically epoch and root are needed to verify the proof unless they are somehow available at the verifier side.

Author: They are not default because they are implementation specific. Depending on the app, they can only be used at the verifier side, and not actually be included in the messages themselves.

---
slug: 32
title: 32/RLN

> name: RLN specification

Reviewer 2: Rate Limit Nullifier maybe?

status: raw
editor: Blagoj Dimovski <blagoj.dimovski@yandex.com>

> contributors: <TO BE ADDED>

Reviewer 2: Field missing / should be blank if nothing

---

# Abstract

The following document covers the specification of the RLN construct as well as the auxiliary libraries necessary for interaction with it.

# Motivation

Spamming is the use of messaging systems to send multiple unsolicited messages (spam) to large numbers of recipients for the purpose of commercial advertising, for the purpose of non-commercial proselytizing, for any prohibited purpose (especially the fraudulent purpose of phishing), or simply sending the same message over and over to the same user. 
Spamming by certain entities can worsen the user experience for the other entities in the application, 
and in some cases can be detrimental for the applications.

RLN (Rate limiting nullfier) is a construct based on zero-knowledge proofs that enables spam prevention mechanism for decentralized, anonymous environments. 
In anonymous environments, the identity of the entities is unknown, and thus it is very hard to prevent spam attacks. 
Many applications would benefit from anonymity, but the potential for spam could worsen their UX to a large extent. 

> RLN allows for anonymous signaling while enabling spam prevention on protocol level.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Rate limiting nullified (RLN) is a construct based on zero-knowledge proofs that provides an anonymous rate-limited signaling/messaging framework suitable for decentralized (and centralized) environments. 
Anonymity refers to the unlinkability of messages to their owner.
RLN guarantees a messaging rate is enforced cryptographically while preserving the anonymity of the message owners.
A wide range of applications can benefit from RLN and provide desirable security features. 
For example, an e-voting system can integrate RLN to contain the voting rate while protecting the voters-vote unlinkability. 
Another use case is to protect an anonymous messaging system against DDoS and spam attacks by containing messaging rate of users. 
This latter use case is explained in [17/Waku-RLN-Relay RFC](/spec/17).
```

> # Technical overview

Reviewer: I think it would be easier to understand the specs if we switch the order of the Technical overview section with the Flow section.

Author: I agree with this.

The main RLN construct is implemented using a [ZK-SNARK](https://z.cash/technology/zksnarks/) circuit. 
However it is helpful to describe the other necessary outside components for interaction with the circuit, 
which together with the ZK-SNARK circuit enable the above mentioned features.

## Terminology

| Term                      | Description                                                                         |
|---------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| **ZK-SNARK**    | https://z.cash/technology/zksnarks/              |

> | **Stake**                 | Financial or social stake required for registering in the RLN applications. The staking requirement is necessary for disincentivising the end users to spam. A common stake examples are: locking cryptocurrency (financial), linking reputable social identity. |

Reviewer: I think this part can be removed safely to keep the table more succinct, it is already explained in the text 
```suggestion
| **Stake**                 | Financial or social stake required for registering in the RLN applications.  Common stake examples are: locking cryptocurrency (financial), linking reputable social identity. |
```

| **RLN Registration**    | The process of the user registering themselves to the RLN protocol. The registrations can occur onchain or offchain. Financial or social stake is required for registering to the protocol.   |

> | **Slashing**              | The process of retreiving the secret hash from the user that spams, and from the secret hash generating the identity commitment. Having the secret hash of a user implies that anyone could reveal their "identity" and also retreive their financial stake if it is enabled by the app.      |

Reviewer: I am not sure whether we need these two i.e., RLN registration and slashing as terms

Author: Probably not, I will remove them.

> | **Identity nullifier**    | Random 32 byte value used as component for identity secret generation.              |
> | **Identity trapdoor**     | Random 32 byte value used as component for identity secret generation.              |
> | **Identity secret**       | An array of two unique random components (identity nullifier and identity trapdoor), which must be kept secret from the users. Secret hash and identity commitment are derived from this array.        |

Reviewer: Reordered identity secret row:
```suggestion
| **Identity secret**       | An array of two unique random components (identity nullifier and identity trapdoor), which must be kept secret from the users. Secret hash and identity commitment are derived from this array.        |
| **Identity nullifier**    | Random 32 byte value used as component for identity secret generation.              |
| **Identity trapdoor**     | Random 32 byte value used as component for identity secret generation.              |
```

> | **Identity nullifier**    | Random 32 byte value used as component for identity secret generation.              |
> | **Identity trapdoor**     | Random 32 byte value used as component for identity secret generation.              |
> | **Identity secret**       | An array of two unique random components (identity nullifier and identity trapdoor), which must be kept secret from the users. Secret hash and identity commitment are derived from this array.        |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| **Identity nullifier**    | Random 32 byte value used as component for identity secret generation.              |
| **Identity trapdoor**     | Random 32 byte value used as component for identity secret generation.              |
| **Identity secret**       | An array of two unique random components (identity nullifier and identity trapdoor), which must be kept secret.        |
```

> | **Identity secret hash**  | The hash of the identity secret, obtained using the Poseidon hash function. It is used for deriving the identity commitment of the user, and as a private input for zk proof generation. The secret hash should be treated as "private key" for the RLN protocol. The anonymity and security of the user is dependent on the secret hash.                                       |

Reviewer: Can you please on this part? the "private key" used in the first sentence implies some level of secrecy for the secret hash but the next sentence 
> "The anonymity and security of the user is dependent ..." 

defeats this implication. Wondering should the secret hash be kept private or not?

Author: it should be definitely kept private, I should formulate this better as this sentence is confusing

| **Identity commitment**   | Hash obtained from the `Identity secret hash` by using the poseidon hash function. It is used by the users for registering in the protocol.                                       |

> | **Signal**                | The message that needs to be sent by the user in a privacy preserving way. The message can be of different type, depending on the application. It can be a chat message, url request, protobuf message. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| **Signal**                | The message generated by a user. It is an arbitrary bit string that may represent a chat message, a URL request, protobuf message, etc. |
```

| **Signal hash**           | Hash of the signal, used as an input in the RLN circuit. |

> | **Epoch**                 | An identifier that groups signals and determines the validity of the signal. Can be though ot as voting booth. Usually a timestamp or time interval in the RLN apps. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| **Epoch**                 | An identifier that groups signals and can be thought of as a voting booth. Usually a timestamp or time interval in the RLN apps. |
```

| **RLN Identifier**        | Random finite field value unique per RLN app. It is used for additional cross-application security. The role of the RLN identifier is protection of the user secrets being compromised if signals are being generated with the same credentials at different apps. |
| **RLN membership tree**   | Merkle tree data structure, filled with identity commitments of the users. Serves as a data structure that ensures user registrations.   |
| **Merkle proof**          | Proof that a user is member of the RLN membership tree.    |

## RLN ZK-Circuit specific terms

| Term           | Description                                                       |
|---------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

> | **X Share**               | Hash of the signal, public input in the RLN circuit.    |

Reviewer: How about (we also use `share_x` in the waku-rln-relay spec):
```suggestion
| **share_x**               | Hash of the signal.    |
```

| **A0**               | The identity secret hash.    |

> | **A1**               | Poseidon hash of [a0, external_nullifier] (see about External nullifier below).    |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| **A1**               | Poseidon hash of [A0, External nullifier] (see about External nullifier below).    |
```

> | **Y Share**          | The result of the polynomial equation (y = a0 + a1*x). Public output of the circuit.    |

Reviewer: Similar to my suggestion for X share:
```suggestion
| **share_y**          | The result of the polynomial equation (y = a0 + a1*x). The public output of the circuit.    |
```

Reviewer: Wondering Y share is the public output of the circuit? or public input?

Author: It is output from the circuit, but it is also input needed for proof verification.

> | **External nullifier**    | `keccak256` hash of the Epoch.    |

Reviewer: Is it necessary to hash the Epoch? is it for length preserving? what if the epoch length is already less than 256 bits and the application uses zero padding to meet the length requirement?

Author: It is necessary. The necessity is because of the fact we need to have a deterministic format, so that we can ensure that hashing inside the circuit is done without any errors. Not parsing the epoch could lead to problems in the circuit, so internal representation of the epoch is needed. Of course other forms of internal representation could be used.

> | **Internal nullifier**    | Poseidon hash of [a1, rln_identifier]. This field ensures that a user can send only one valid signal per epoch without risking being slashed. Public output of the circuit.   |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| **Internal nullifier**    | Poseidon hash of [A1, RLN Identifier]. This field ensures that a user can send only one valid signal per epoch without risking being slashed. Public input of the circuit.   |
```

## ZK Circuits specification

> Anonymous signaling with spam detection is enabled by proving that the user is part of a group which has high barriers to entry (form of stake) and 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Anonymous signaling with a controlled rate limit is enabled by proving that the user is part of a group which has high barriers to entry (form of stake) and 
```

> enabling secret reveal if more signals are produced than the spam threshold (system parameter) per epoch.

Reviewer: I'd suggest focusing on the general application of RLN, and replacing the term `spam`  with `double signaling`, also using `rate limit` or `double signaling detection` instead of `spam detection`.

Author: I agree with your suggestion, it's much more precise.

In order to be able to generate valid proofs, the users need to be part of the identity membership merkle tree. 
They are part of the identity membership merkle tree if their `identity_commitment` is placed in a leaf in the tree.

The identity credentials of a user are composed of:

- `identity_secret`
- `identity_secret_hash`
- `identity_commitment`

### `identity_secret`

The `identity_secret` is generated in the following way:

```
    identity_nullifier = random_32_byte_buffer
    identity_trapdoor = random_32_byte_buffer
    identity_secret = [identity_nullifier, identity_trapdoor]
```

The same secret should not be used accross different protocols, 
because revealing the secret at one protocol could break privacy for the user in the other protocols.  

### `identity_secret_hash`

The `identity_secret_hash` is generated by obtaining a Poseidon hash of the `identity_secret` array:

```
    identity_secret_hash = poseidonHash(identity_secret)
```

### `identity_commitment`

The `identity_commitment` is generated by obtaining a Poseidon hash of the `identity_secret_hash`: 

```
identity_commitment = poseidonHash([identity_secret_hash])
```

# Flow

> The users participate in the protocol by first registering to the application. 
> The application can have different form of registration. 
> The goal of this step is the user to become a member of the group.
> Usually the membership requires financial or social stake. 
> Barrier for entry is required for dis-incentivising the users from spamming.
> After they are part of the memebrship group, 
> the users can generate ZK-Proofs for their signals and can participate in the application. 
> If a user generates more signals than allowed in an epoch, 
> the user risks being slashed - by revealing his secret and revealing his identity commitment. 
> If financial stake is put in place, the user also risks his stake being taken.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The users participate in the protocol by first registering to an application-defined group referred by the _membership group_.
Registration to the group is mandatory for signaling in the application. 
After registration, group members can generate Zero-knowledge Proof of membership for their signals and can participate in the application. 
Usually, the membership requires a financial or social stake which 
is beneficial for the prevention of Sybil attacks and double-signaling.
Group members are allowed to send one signal per epoch.
If a user generates more signals than allowed in an epoch, 
the user risks being slashed - by revealing his membership secret credentials. secret and revealing his identity commitment. 
If the financial stake is put in place, the user also risks his stake being taken.
```

---
slug: 32
title: 32/RLN
name: Rate Limit Nullifier
status: raw
editor: Blagoj Dimovski <blagoj.dimovski@yandex.com>

> contributors: Barry Whitehat <barrywhitehat@protonmail.com>, Sanaz Taheri <sanaz@status.im>, Oskar Thorén <oskar@status.im>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
contributors: 
- Barry Whitehat <barrywhitehat@protonmail.com>
- Sanaz Taheri <sanaz@status.im>
- Oskar Thorén <oskar@status.im>
```
The CI errors, ad far as I can tell, are related to the format of contributors, they should be itemized. My suggested change should fix the error.
